Definition of the HostClaim resource (#408)
metal3-io/metal3-docs: design/hostclaim-multitenancy.md

two optional subfields:

* ``matches``: the content of this field is a regular expression
  (in Golang re2 syntax). The name of the namespace where the HostClaim is located
  must match this regular expression.
* ``withLabel``: the content of the field is a list of strings representing
  labels. The namespace of the HostClaim must have a label belonging to the
  list.

#### Multi-tenancy

As an infrastructure administrator I would like to host several isolated
clusters.

All the servers in the data-center are registered as BareMetalHost in one or
several namespaces under the control of the infrastructure manager. Namespaces
are created for each tenant of the infrastructure. They create
standard cluster definitions in those namespaces.

When the cluster is started, a HostClaim is created for each Metal3Machine
associated to the cluster. The ``hostSelector`` is inherited from the
Metal3Machine. As in the original workflow, it is used to choose the BareMetalHost
associated with the cluster, but he associated BareMetalHost is not in the same
namespace as the HostClaim. The exact definition of the BareMetalHost remains

> hidden from the cluster user, only parts of its status and metadata are copied

Reviewer: Let's mention what we discuss about showing HardwareDetails as a way for users to know which hosts are available to them.

Author: Yes that is the new proposal I have to write. We called it HardwareDetail during the meeting as in Zane proposal but there is already HardwareData with its hardwareDetail field. Do we want something else ? It is just promoting HardwareData from an internal tool role to a first class use. Then at some point, bmh does not even need to create the status.hardware field, the inspect.metal3.io/hardwaredetails becomes useless. and you can have your Netbox -> hardwareDetail automatic provisionner if you want (inspect.metal3.io: "" on the other hand could become an official boolean field).

But if we only see HardwareData, there is still the problem I mentionned: how do we access fields for solving fromAnnotations and fromLabels ? 
- Do we copy them from the BareMetalHost ? 
- Let the user create HardwareData object (populated by inspection or other) and put whatever metadata he wants ? 

That could be a point of friction when switching from BMH to Hostclaims.

Reviewer: I thought you meant to use HardwareData (the existing one) as a sort of public inventory? Did I misunderstand?

> But if we only see HardwareData, there is still the problem I mentionned: how do we access fields for solving fromAnnotations and fromLabels ?

I agree. That's why I initially assumed that there would be a new CRD representing inventory available for a user. I guess that's what Zane called BareMetalAllocation?

Author: Yes I think we should use HardwareData and not invent something new. Adding yet another CRD for just the meta-data seems on the other hand heavy-weighted. 

- One solution to avoid the need for a CRD is to use HardwareData meta-data as the source of meta-data for templates. It means that user can create them and even if the spec is populated by the BMH controller, the resource itself is kept (createOrUpdate behavior that does not try to change meta-data). One of the drawback is that it is another disrupting change as hardware admins used the BMH resource for that (but creating yet another CRD is worse).
- Another solution is to dynamically synchronize BMH meta-data and HardwareData resource.  There are two options:
     - synchronize with Hardware metadata but then there is a risk of collision. Advantage: could be an optional behaviour   but a default during migration from previous behaviour to the solution described above. Drawback is that we need to be careful if we want to let other sources define some meta-data on HardwareData for other purposes (end up with reserved annotations keeping track of what was synchronized from the BMH and this is not clean). If we view it as a temporary migration behaviour, we can choose full synchronization (meta-data put directly on HardwareData would be destroyed).
     - copy to HardwareData.status.metadata: doing this is much simpler. On the other hand there is no path to solution 1 where hardware manager use directly HardwareData as the source for meta-data.

  Both sub-options mean copying data.

back to the HostClaim resource. With this information,
the data template controller has enough details to compute the different
secrets (userData, metaData and networkData) associated to the Metal3Machine.

> Those secrets are linked to the HostClaim and, ultimately, to the

Reviewer: Note: they'll need to be copied over to the BMH namespace.

BareMetalHost.

When the cluster is modified, new Machine and Metal3Machine resources replace
the previous ones. The HostClaims follow the life-cycle of the Metal3Machines
and are destroyed with them. The BareMetalHosts are recycled and are bound to
new HostClaims, potentially belonging to other clusters.

#### Compute Resources in Another Cluster

As a user I would like to describe my cluster within a specific management
cluster. However the resources I intend to use (such as BareMetalHosts or
KubeVirt virtual machines) will be defined in a separate cluster.

The multi-tenancy extension for BareMetalHost is extended to HostClaims.
Metal3Machine field ``identityRef`` points to a
secret containing a kubeconfig object. This kubeconfig will be utilized instead
of the HostClaim controller service account to create and manage HostClaim
resources

```yaml
  apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
  kind: HostClaim
  metadata:
    name: host-claim-yyyy
    namespace: user1-ns
  spec:

>     kind: baremetalhost

Reviewer: Let's make sure to default `kind` to `baremetalhost`: most users will want to provision bare-metal only

Reviewer: The good thing is: we can discuss hybrid clusters separately once we fix the pressing problem.

>     credentials: bmh-cluster-credentials

Reviewer: Let's call it `identityRef` for similarity with CAPM3 resources

Reviewer: Still worth addressing: the other proposal was approved with an `identityRef`

>     userData:

Reviewer: Let's group `userData`, `image` and co under something like `template` for the UX benefit (similarity to Deployments, etc)

control-plane it belongs to (using the algorithm that was used at the time of
BareMetalHost deletion).

When the HostClaim is deleted, the BareMetalHost is tagged with the node reuse
label ``infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/node-reuse`` with a value
joining the namespace of the HostClaim and the value of the ``nodeReuse`` field.

When a new HostClaim is created, if the ``nodeReuse`` field is set, the
claim will try to bind a BareMetalHost with the label
``infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/node-reuse`` set to the right value.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Security Impact of Making BareMetalHost Selection Cluster-wide

The main difference between Metal3 machines and HostClaims it the
selection process where a HostClaim can be bound to a BareMetalHost
in another namespace. We must make sure that the binding is expected
from both the owner of BareMetalHost resources and the HostClaim resource,
especially when we upgrade the metal3 cluster api provider to a version
supporting HostClaim.

Choosing between HostClaims and BareMetalHost is done at the level of
the Metal3Machine controller through a configuration flag. When the HostClaim

> mode is activated, all clusters are deployed with HostClaim resources.

Reviewer: Is there any reason not to use HostClaims always?

For the server administrator, the solution is to enforce that BareMetalHost
that can be bound to a HostClaim have the field ``hostClaimNamespaces``

> restricting authorized HostClaims to specific namespaces:

Reviewer: This should be a new resource (e.g. HostDeployPolicy) for these reasons:

1. To avoid further cluttering BMH
2. Users who can edit policies are not necessarily users who own hardware
3. We may want to make these resources world-viewable so that users know the policies that apply to them

The OS image is available in qcow format on a remote server at ``url_image``.
It supports cloud-init, and a script can launch the workload at boot time
(e.g., a systemd service).

The cluster offers bare-metal as a service using the Metal3 baremetal-operator.
However, as a regular user, I am not allowed to directly access the definitions
of the servers, but I can read the result of the inspection (HardwareData).
The HardwareData resource also contains a copy of the metadata (labels and
annotations of the resource) of the BareMetalHost visible to the end-user.

All HardwareData are labeled with an ``infra-kind`` label whose
value depends on the characteristics of the hardware. This label was set
by the hardware administrator on the BareMetalHost when it was defined.

* I can read HardwareData in the namespace ``infra``. I can find which selector
  I should use to locate a machine with the right hardware details.
* I create a resource with the following content:

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
  kind: HostClaim
  metadata:
    name: my-host
    namespace: myns
  spec:
    online: false

    hostSelector:
      matchLabels:

>         infra-kind: medium

Reviewer 2: Should we include a namespace here? It seems to me that would simplify both the user experience and the implementation.

Without the namespace, we could get surprising behavior when multiple HostDeployPolicies match, and the controller would need to filter through HostDeployPolices in the cluster plus all BareMetalHosts in allowed namespaces. With namespace, the user will know from where the host is selected and the controller will only need to check one HostDeployPolicy plus BareMetalHosts in that namespace.

The only drawback is that users cannot ask for BareMetalHosts from multiple namespaces. Do you think that is an issue? Maybe we want namespaceSelector + matchLabels?

Author: I would rather not let the end-user select the namespace from which the BMH is selected. This is a bmh owner issue and if things should be improved, I would rather give him tools to load balance the namespaces (We could have different Ironic instances per namespace. This is an alternative to having the conductors doing the balancing work).

Author: @lentzi90 I have pushed a new version with a namespace field in hostSelector. I still think it is not a good idea: 

- New fields in both metal3machine and metal3machinetemplates that have a meaning only with HostClaims
- The implementation is not simpler. The way to implement the previous design is to list all HostDeployPolicies and keep the namespaces of the ones that are compatible with the namespace of the HostClaim. Then we list the BMH in those namespaces and do selection as usual. 
- If the BMH admin has two namespaces, one with BMH for A and B and another for A and C. A can now starve B by selecting BMH only from the first namespace. To avoid this, we should add some kind of labelSelector on BMH in the HostDeployPolicy so that all machines for A B and C can be put in the same namespace. This would really make implementation harder !
- if the BMH admin wants to give the ability to select hardware depending on the namespace, he can add a namespace label to each BMH.

Beyond this issue, is there anything else to solve before we can proceed to the implementation ?

  ```

* After a while, the system associates the claim with a real server, and
  the resource's status is populated with the following information:

  ```yaml
  status:

>     bareMetalHost:

Reviewer: nit: `bareMetalHostRef` (convention)

The specification of the HostDeployPolicy contains one or several of the
optional fields:

* ``namespaces``: the content of this field is a list of namespaces. The name of
  the namespace where the HostClaim is must be a member of the list.
* ``nameMatches``: the content of this field is a regular expression
  (in Golang re2 syntax). The name of the namespace where the HostClaim is located
  must match this regular expression.
* ``withLabels``: the content of the field is a list of strings representing
  labels. The namespace of the HostClaim must have a label belonging to the
  list.

To successfully match, the namespace must fulfill the constraints of all the
defined fields. An empty HostDeployPolicy authorizes all namespaces.
A HostClaim is authorized to bind a BareMetalHost if and only if the namespace
of the HostClaim is successfully filtered by at least one HostDeployPolicy in
the namespace of the BareMetalHost. In that case, the binding between the
HostClaim and the BareMetalHost is authorized.

A HostDeployPolicy specification also contains a field ``metadataCopy``. It defines
rules for which annotations are copied (``annotationsMatch``) and which

> labels are copied (``labelsMatch``). Both fields contain regular expressions.

Author: Yes. I have added a line making it clear.

clusters.

All the servers in the data-center are registered as BareMetalHost in one or
several namespaces under the control of the infrastructure manager. Namespaces
are created for each tenant of the infrastructure. They create
standard cluster definitions in those namespaces.

When the cluster is started, a HostClaim is created for each Metal3Machine
associated with the cluster. The ``hostSelector`` is inherited from the
Metal3Machine. As in the original workflow, it is used to choose the BareMetalHost
associated with the cluster, but the associated BareMetalHost is not in the same
namespace as the HostClaim. The exact definition of the BareMetalHost remains
hidden from the cluster user; only a small parts of its status is copied
back to the HostClaim resource (actual power state). The status of the HostClaim
contains a reference to the BareMetalHost and so to the HardwareData that is
readable by the end user.

With the help of HardwareData, the data template controller has enough details to
compute the different secrets (userData, metaData and networkData) associated to
the Metal3Machine. These secrets are linked to the HostClaim and, ultimately, to

> the BareMetalHost.

Reviewer 2: I would like to clarify how the secrets are handled. Are they created in the same namespace as the HostClaim and then copied to the BareMetalHost namespace?

Author: Added a few lines. As usual the tricky part is garbage collection when the bmh is reused.

The Metal3Data controller must target either BareMetalHost or HostClaims
(specifically the HardwareData pointed to by the HostClaim) for some template fields:

* ``fromLabel`` and ``fromAnnotation`` where object is ``baremetalhost``.
* ``fromHostInterface`` and ``fromAnnotation`` in the network data definition

The solution is to introduce an intermediate abstract object.

#### Impact on NodeReuse

NodeReuse is implemented in the HostClaim controller with the same algorithm
as in the original workflow, but the content of the label on the BareMetalHost
is slightly different.

When a machine template is marked for node reuse, the generated HostClaim
``nodeReuse`` field contains a string identifying the deployment or the
control-plane it belongs to (using the algorithm that was used at the time of
BareMetalHost deletion).

When the HostClaim is deleted, the BareMetalHost is tagged with the node reuse
label ``infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/node-reuse`` with a value
combining the namespace of the HostClaim and the value of the ``nodeReuse`` field.

When a new HostClaim is created, if the ``nodeReuse`` field is set, the
claim will attempt to bind to a BareMetalHost with the label

> ``infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/node-reuse`` set to the correct value.

Author: That was also my initial idea but it is trickier than it looks. The problem is that there is no difference between a machine deployment scale down and an upgrade from the Metal3Machine point of view. So we need to keep an option on the BMH but only for a limited amount of time... This is easier when all the selection process is on one side. Would you always trust a remote M3M controller keeping a hostclaim alive for node reuse ?

    lastUpdated: "2024-03-29T14:33:19Z"
  ```

  The BareMetalHost resource is updated so that the consumerRef field points
  to the HostClaim resource.

* I create three secrets in the same namespace: ``my-user-data``,
  ``my-metadata``, and ``my-network-data``. I use the information from the
  status and meta data to customize the scripts they contain.
* I modify the HostClaim to point to those secrets and start the server:

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
  kind: HostClaim
  metadata:
    name: my-host
  spec:
    online: true
    image:
      checksum: https://url_image.qcow2.md5
      url: https://url_image.qcow2
      format: qcow2
    userData:
      name: my-user-data
    networkData:
      name: my-network-data
    hostSelector:
      matchLabels:
        infra-kind: medium
  ```

  Note: customDeploy must be supported as an alternative to images.
* The workload is launched. When the machine is fully provisioned, the boolean
  field ready in the status becomes true. I can stop the server by changing
  the online status. I can also perform a reboot by adding a
  ``reboot.metal3.io`` annotation on the HostClaim as I would do on the
  BareMetalHost resource.

> * When I destroy the host, the association is broken and another user can take

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When I delete the HostClaim, the association is broken and another user can take
```

  will be limited to the use with cluster-api as it will be handled at the
  level of the Metal3Machine.

### Non-Goals

* Compute resource quotas. The HostClaim resource should make it possible to
  develop a framework to limit the number/size of compute resources allocated
  to a tenant, similar to how quotas work for pods. However, the specification
  of such a framework will be addressed in another design document.
* Implementing network isolation between tenant clusters using a common set
  of BareMetalHosts.

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### Deployment of Simple Workloads

##### User Point of View

As an *end-user*, I would like to execute a workload on an arbitrary server.

The OS image is available in qcow format on a remote server at ``url_image``.
It supports cloud-init and a script can launch the workload at boot time
(e.g., a systemd service).

The cluster offers bare-metal as a service using Metal3 baremetal-operator.
However, as a regular user, I am not allowed to directly access the definitions
of the servers, but I can read the result of the inspection (HardwareData).
The HardwareData resource also contains a copy of the metadata of the

> BareMetalHost visible to the end-user.

Reviewer: Which metadata do you have in mind here?

Author: labels and annotations of the resource.

> All HardwareData are labeled with an ``infra-kind`` label whose

Reviewer: This is a manual action by the admin, right? Worth clarifying the actors IMO.

Author: Yes and as a consequence of previous comment it should be put on the baremetalhost. HardwareData is still seen as a transient resource. I will add a sentence defining the hardware administrator.

value depends on the characteristics of the computer.

* I can read HardwareData in namespace ``infra``. I can find which selector
  I should use to find a machine with the right hardware details.
* I create a resource with the following content:

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
  kind: HostClaim
  metadata:
    name: my-host
  spec:
    online: false

    hostSelector:
      matchLabels:
        infra-kind: medium
  ```

* After a while, the system associates the claim with a real server, and
  the resource's status is populated with the following information:

  ```yaml
  status:
    bareMetalHost:
      name: server-123
      namespace: infra
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-03-29T14:33:19Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-03-29T14:33:19Z"
      status: "True"

>       type: AssociateBMH

Reviewer: nit: s/BMH/Host/ ? (for readability)

    lastUpdated: "2024-03-29T14:33:19Z"
  ```

* I create three secrets in the same namespace ``my-user-data``,
  ``my-metadata``, and ``my-network-data``. I use the information from the
  status and meta data to customize the scripts they contain.
* I modify the HostClaim to point to those secrets and start the server:

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
  kind: HostClaim
  metadata:
    name: my-host
  spec:
    online: true

>     image:

Reviewer: I'm still pondering organizing all fields that are directly copied into BMH under a `template` sub-field (better names welcome) similar to how Deployments have pod templates. This way, it's obvious what is always copied and what belongs to HostClaim itself. WDYT?

Author: Template usually  implies a new resource fully described by the template, it could be misleading. It may help structure the resource, but there are really only two parts: selectors and content. I do not think there is much confusion (for example I thnik there is more in HostDeployPolicy where I introduced an intermediate structuring field).

      checksum: https://url_image.qcow2.md5
      url: https://url_image.qcow2

>       format: qcow2

Reviewer: nit: let's not forget `customDeploy`, which is an a bit exotic alternative to `image`

    userData:
      name: my-user-data
    networkData:
      name: my-network-data
    hostSelector:
      matchLabels:
        infra-kind: medium
  ```

* The workload is launched. When the machine is fully provisioned, the boolean
  field ready in the status becomes true. I can stop the server by changing
  the online status. I can also perform a reboot by targeting specific

>   annotations in the reserved ``host.metal3.io`` domain.

Reviewer: Why not simply accept the same reboot annotation that BMH accepts (and copy it over)?

Author: Good catch. host.metal3.io made sense when the HostClaim resource was used to expose BMH metadata. So some labels/annotations were flowing upward from BMH to HostClaims whereas specific annotations like the one for reboot were flowing downward. Now that HardwareData are ivisible and expose metadata, all this complexity is obosolete.

* When I destroy the host, the association is broken and another user can take
  over the server.

##### Server Administrator Point of View

As the owner of the bare-metal servers, I would like to easily control the users
that can use my servers and control the information I share about the servers.

In each namespace hosting BareMetalHosts, I define one
or several HostDeployPolicy resources. Each resource defines a filter on the
namespaces of the HostClaims in the field ``hostclaimNamespaces``.

The specification of the HostDeployPolicy contains one or several of the
optional fields:

* ``namespaces``: the content of this field is a list of namespaces. The name of
  the namespace where the HostClaim is must be a member of the list.
* ``nameMatches``: the content of this field is a regular expression
  (in Golang re2 syntax). The name of the namespace where the HostClaim is located

>   must match this regular expression.

Reviewer: nit: it looks like you could just use a single `namespaceMatches` list where each item is a regular expression

Reviewer: > It is easy to add a new item to the list with a patch. 

Fair point.

> I am not sure we really need nameMatches

Yeah, maybe omit it from the initial version for simplicity.

* ``withLabels``: the content of the field is a list of strings representing
  labels. The namespace of the HostClaim must have a label belonging to the
  list.

To successfully match, the namespace must fulfill the constraints of all the
fields that are defined. An empty HostDeployPolicy authorizes all namespaces.
A HostClaim is authorized to bind a BareMetalHost if and only if the namespace
of the HostClaim is successfully filtered by at least one HostDeployPolicy in
the namespace of the BareMetalHost. In that case, the binding between the
HostClaim and the BareMetalHost is authorized.

A HostDeployPolicy specification also contains a field ``metadataCopy``. It defines
rules for which annotations are copied (``annotationsMatch``) and which
labels are copied (``labelsMatch``). Both fields contain regular expressions.

For example,

```yaml
apiVersion: metal3.io/v1alpha1
kind: HostDeployPolicy
metadata:
  name: policy
  namespace: infra
spec:

>   hostclaimNamespaces:

Reviewer: nit: `hostClaimNamespaces`

Reviewer: But also, why have this field at all? You can put `namespaces` etc under `spec` directly.

Author: Because of the two roles of HostDeployPolicy (metadataCopy). A resource may only address one of the concern by explicitly not specifying the group. On the other hand a HostDeployPolicy with a hostClaimNamespace: {] explicitly
states that there are no restrictions on the namespaces of HostClaims.

    namespaces:
    - cluster1
    - cluster2
  metadataCopy:
    annotationsMatch: 'mydomain/.*'
    labelsMatch: 'selectors/.*'
```

> will make the BareMetalHosts in namespace ``infra`` to HostClaims in namespaces

Reviewer: nit: "... available to ..."

``cluster1`` and ``cluster2``. All labels in domain ``selectors`` will be
available for selection as annotations in ``mydomain`` for constructing
cloud-init ``metadata``.

> 

Reviewer: Missing part: how is binding between BMH and HostClaim established? Via `consumerRef`?

Author: On the first comment, I remove this part. The identityRef is on the Metal3Machine NOT on the hostClaim. The yaml does not bring anything but confusion. I have added a sentence explictly telling this. We may revisit it later to address the case of a workload not managed by cluster-api-provider-metal3 that we would like to execute on a remote cluster (but is it really worth the complexity as we still need to read HardwareData on the remote cluster).

Reviewer: If you don't have any back link from the BMH to the HC, your controller won't be able to receive reconciliation requests for the HC whenever the BMH changes, which is crucial e.g. for tracking the deployment process. I think you need some link, which is probably `consumerRef`.

Author: Yes it is the consumerRef. line 152-153 should tell that may be not at the right place.

associated to the cluster. The ``hostSelector`` is inherited from the
Metal3Machine. As in the original workflow, it is used to choose the BareMetalHost
associated with the cluster, but the associated BareMetalHost is not in the same
namespace as the HostClaim. The exact definition of the BareMetalHost remains
hidden from the cluster user, only a small parts of its status is copied
back to the HostClaim resource (actual power state). The status of the HostClaim
contains a reference to the BareMetalHost and so to the HardwareData that is
readable by the end user.

With the help of HardwareData, the data template controller has enough details to
compute the different secrets (userData, metaData and networkData) associated to
the Metal3Machine. Those secrets are linked to the HostClaim and, ultimately, to
the BareMetalHost.

When the cluster is modified, new Machine and Metal3Machine resources replace
the previous ones. The HostClaims follow the life-cycle of the Metal3Machines
and are destroyed with them. The BareMetalHosts are recycled and are bound to
new HostClaims, potentially belonging to other clusters.

> #### Compute Resources in Another Cluster

Reviewer: I assume this part is now covered by [Lennart's proposal?](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/pull/429), so maybe link to it and avoid duplicate information here?

Author: An explicit pointer on the document yes, but it must be reimplemented at the level of HostClaims so I think it cannot be completely removed and it must be clear that the Metal3Machine creates a HostClaim on a remote cluster, not that the HostClaim creates a remote BMH.

#### Security Impact of Making BareMetalHost Selection Cluster-wide

The main difference between Metal3 machines and HostClaims it the
selection process where a HostClaim can be bound to a BareMetalHost
in another namespace. We must make sure that the binding is expected
from both the owner of BareMetalHost resources and the HostClaim resource,
especially when we upgrade the metal3 cluster api provider to a version
supporting HostClaim.

Choosing between HostClaims and BareMetalHost is done at the level of
the Metal3Machine controller through a configuration flag. When the HostClaim
mode is activated, all clusters are deployed with HostClaim resources.

For the server administrator, the HostDeployPolicy restrict the BareMetalHosts
that can be used by HostClaims and the namespaces of those resources.

The owner of the HostClaim restricts the server through the use of selectors.
There can be only one server administrator and the tenants must trust the
semantic of the labels used for selection so a new mechanism is not necessary
on the tenant side.

#### Tenants Trying to Bypass the Selection Mechanism

The fact that a HostClaim is bound to a specific BareMetalHost will appear

> as a label in the HostClaim and the HostClaim controller will use it to find

Reviewer: This looks outdated: the current proposal has `status.bareMetalHost`
